README.md, before:

# YOLO Model Comparison for Mask and Person Detection

# Project Purpose
This project compares the performance of different YOLO models in detecting:

- **Persons and face masks.**
- **Social distancing** by measuring distances between detected persons.

The goal is to evaluate model efficiency and accuracy under real-world conditions.

## Modes of Operation

### 1. Live Video (Webcam Mode)
The system supports real-time detection with adjustable parameters. The following keyboard controls are available:

**Navigation Controls:**
- **IOU Threshold:** `"i"` = Increase, `"u"` = Decrease  
- **Confidence Threshold:** `"c"` = Increase, `"d"` = Decrease  
- **Prediction Framerate:** `"p"` = Increase, `"o"` = Decrease  
- **Model Selection:** `"1"` = Model M1, `"2"` = Model M2  
- **Distance Testing:** `"t"` = On, `"z"` = Off  
- **Toggle Blur Effect:** `"b"` = On, `"v"` = Off  

### 2. Video Analysis Mode
For offline analysis, videos should be placed in the **`data_sets/video_data/`** directory and referenced in **`main_test_video.py`** for processing.

## **Project Demonstration on Live Webcam**
[![Project Demonstration](https://img.youtube.com/vi/zNIX0ZhWMbA/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/zNIX0ZhWMbA)

<sub>*Source: [YouTube - created by l.lattermann](https://youtu.be/zNIX0ZhWMbA)*</sub>

## **Project Demonstration on stock video footage**

### **Mask/No Mask (Small Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1212372184-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/virusepidemie-ist-in-einer-stadt-beendet-frau-und-mann-nehmen-chirurgische-masken-gm1212372184-351930090)*</sub>

### **Multiple Persons (Small Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1267958948-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/studenten-tragen-masken-auf-dem-campus-gm1267958948-372111685)*</sub>


### **Multiple Persons (Great Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1217776095-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/überfüllte-menschen-die-eine-gesichtsmaske-tragen-um-coronavirus-oder-covid-19-gm1217776095-355595911)*</sub>


## **Installation**
Follow these steps to set up the project:

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/l-lattermann/yolo-mobilenet-realtime-mask-detection.git
   cd <repository_directory>
   ```

2. Install the required dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

---

## **Project Structure**
- **`data_sets/`**  
  Contains images and video datasets for testing models.

  - **`image_data/`**  
    Directory for storing image datasets.

  - **`video_data/`**  
    Directory for storing video datasets.

- **`models/`**  
  Stores YOLO model weights and configurations.

  - **`yolov8n_mask.pt`**  
    YOLOv8 nano model trained for mask detection.

  - **`yolov8n_person.pt`**  
    YOLOv8 nano model trained for person detection.

  - **`yolov11n_mask.pt`**  
    YOLOv11 nano model trained for mask detection.

  - **`yolov11n_person.pt`**  
    YOLOv11 nano model trained for person detection.

- **`scripts/`**  
  Includes utility scripts for inference and video processing.

  - **`cam_calibration.py`**  
    Script for camera calibration.

  - **`cv2_functions.py`**  
    Contains OpenCV helper functions.

  - **`frame_fetcher.py`**  
    Fetches frames from video sources.

- **`tests/`**  
  Contains test scripts and output data.

  - **`video_test_output/`**  
    Folder that stores the annotated videos.

  - **`test_mp4.ipynb`**  
    Jupyter notebook for testing mp4 video inputs.

  - **`test_path_handling.py`**  
    Script for testing path handling.

  - **`test_webcam.ipynb`**  
    Jupyter notebook for testing webcam inputs.

  - **`understand_yolo_tensor_structure.ipynb`**  
    Notebook for exploring YOLO tensor outputs.

- **`training/`**  
  Results and logs from model training and testing.

  - **`yolov11n_mask_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv11 mask model.

  - **`yolov11n_person_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv11 person model.

  - **`yolov8n_mask_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv8 mask model.

  - **`compare_train_args.ipynb`**  
    Notebook comparing different training arguments.

  - **`train_yolo_colab_nb.ipynb`**  
    Notebook for training YOLO models on Google Colab.

  - **`training_arg_comparison.xlsx`**  
    Excel sheet with training argument comparisons.

- **`.gitignore`**  
  Specifies files and directories to be ignored by Git.

- **`config.py`**  
  Configuration of file paths for the project.

- **`main_live_cam.py`**  
  Script for running YOLO inference on live camera feed.

- **`main_test_video.py`**  
  Script for running YOLO inference on test videos.

- **`README.md`**  
  Project documentation.

- **`requirements.txt`**  
  List of required Python packages for the project.

Commit message:

added project report to README

README.md, after:

# YOLO Model Comparison for Mask and Person Detection
The full desciption of the project can be found as in this [PDF](project_report/20250310_Laurenz_Lattermann_4239646_DLBAIPCV01.pdf).

# Project Purpose
This project compares the performance of different YOLO models in detecting:

- **Persons and face masks.**
- **Social distancing** by measuring distances between detected persons.

The goal is to evaluate model efficiency and accuracy under real-world conditions.

## Modes of Operation

### 1. Live Video (Webcam Mode)
The system supports real-time detection with adjustable parameters. The following keyboard controls are available:

**Navigation Controls:**
- **IOU Threshold:** `"i"` = Increase, `"u"` = Decrease  
- **Confidence Threshold:** `"c"` = Increase, `"d"` = Decrease  
- **Prediction Framerate:** `"p"` = Increase, `"o"` = Decrease  
- **Model Selection:** `"1"` = Model M1, `"2"` = Model M2  
- **Distance Testing:** `"t"` = On, `"z"` = Off  
- **Toggle Blur Effect:** `"b"` = On, `"v"` = Off  

### 2. Video Analysis Mode
For offline analysis, videos should be placed in the **`data_sets/video_data/`** directory and referenced in **`main_test_video.py`** for processing.

## **Project Demonstration on Live Webcam**
[![Project Demonstration](https://img.youtube.com/vi/zNIX0ZhWMbA/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/zNIX0ZhWMbA)

<sub>*Source: [YouTube - created by l.lattermann](https://youtu.be/zNIX0ZhWMbA)*</sub>

## **Project Demonstration on stock video footage**

### **Mask/No Mask (Small Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1212372184-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/virusepidemie-ist-in-einer-stadt-beendet-frau-und-mann-nehmen-chirurgische-masken-gm1212372184-351930090)*</sub>

### **Multiple Persons (Small Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1267958948-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/studenten-tragen-masken-auf-dem-campus-gm1267958948-372111685)*</sub>


### **Multiple Persons (Great Distance)**
<img src="tests/video_test_output/istockphoto-1217776095-640_adpp_is.gif" width="400">

<sub>*Source: [iStock](https://www.istockphoto.com/de/video/überfüllte-menschen-die-eine-gesichtsmaske-tragen-um-coronavirus-oder-covid-19-gm1217776095-355595911)*</sub>


## **Installation**
Follow these steps to set up the project:

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/l-lattermann/yolo-mobilenet-realtime-mask-detection.git
   cd <repository_directory>
   ```

2. Install the required dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

---

## **Project Structure**
- **`data_sets/`**  
  Contains images and video datasets for testing models.

  - **`image_data/`**  
    Directory for storing image datasets.

  - **`video_data/`**  
    Directory for storing video datasets.

- **`models/`**  
  Stores YOLO model weights and configurations.

  - **`yolov8n_mask.pt`**  
    YOLOv8 nano model trained for mask detection.

  - **`yolov8n_person.pt`**  
    YOLOv8 nano model trained for person detection.

  - **`yolov11n_mask.pt`**  
    YOLOv11 nano model trained for mask detection.

  - **`yolov11n_person.pt`**  
    YOLOv11 nano model trained for person detection.

- **`scripts/`**  
  Includes utility scripts for inference and video processing.

  - **`cam_calibration.py`**  
    Script for camera calibration.

  - **`cv2_functions.py`**  
    Contains OpenCV helper functions.

  - **`frame_fetcher.py`**  
    Fetches frames from video sources.

- **`tests/`**  
  Contains test scripts and output data.

  - **`video_test_output/`**  
    Folder that stores the annotated videos.

  - **`test_mp4.ipynb`**  
    Jupyter notebook for testing mp4 video inputs.

  - **`test_path_handling.py`**  
    Script for testing path handling.

  - **`test_webcam.ipynb`**  
    Jupyter notebook for testing webcam inputs.

  - **`understand_yolo_tensor_structure.ipynb`**  
    Notebook for exploring YOLO tensor outputs.

- **`training/`**  
  Results and logs from model training and testing.

  - **`yolov11n_mask_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv11 mask model.

  - **`yolov11n_person_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv11 person model.

  - **`yolov8n_mask_100epochs/`**  
    Training results for YOLOv8 mask model.

  - **`compare_train_args.ipynb`**  
    Notebook comparing different training arguments.

  - **`train_yolo_colab_nb.ipynb`**  
    Notebook for training YOLO models on Google Colab.

  - **`training_arg_comparison.xlsx`**  
    Excel sheet with training argument comparisons.

- **`.gitignore`**  
  Specifies files and directories to be ignored by Git.

- **`config.py`**  
  Configuration of file paths for the project.

- **`main_live_cam.py`**  
  Script for running YOLO inference on live camera feed.

- **`main_test_video.py`**  
  Script for running YOLO inference on test videos.

- **`README.md`**  
  Project documentation.

- **`requirements.txt`**  
  List of required Python packages for the project.
